Update prompt builder documentation to agent builder (#8297)
microsoft/vscode-docs: docs/intelligentapps/agentbuilder.md

---
ContentId: bd3d7555-3d84-4500-ae95-6dcd39641af0

> DateApproved:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
DateApproved: 04/22/2025
```

MetaDescription: Get Started with creating, iterating and optimizing your agents in AI Toolkit.
---
# Build agents and prompts in AI Toolkit

>    > [!NOTE]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [!NOTE]
```

>    > Agent Builder was previously known as Prompt Builder. The name has been changed to better reflect the feature's capabilities and its focus on building agents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> Agent Builder was previously known as Prompt Builder. The name has been changed to better reflect the feature's capabilities and its focus on building agents.
```

> Agent builder in AI Toolkit streamlines the engineering workflow for building agents, including prompt engineering and integration with tool use such as MCP servers. It helps with common prompt engineering tasks:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Agent Builder in AI Toolkit streamlines the engineering workflow for building agents, including prompt engineering and integration with tools, such as MCP servers. It helps with common prompt engineering tasks:
```

- Generate starter prompts
- Iterate and refine with each run
- Break down complex tasks through prompt chaining and structured outputs
- Provide easy access to code for seamless Large Language Model (LLM) integration via APIs

> As well as enhancing the intelligent app's capabilities with tool use, such as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Agent Builder also enhances intelligent app's capabilities with tool use:
```

- Connect to existing MCP servers
- Build a new MCP server from scaffold and test in Agent Builder

![Getting started with prompt builder](./images/promptbuilder/AgentBuilder.gif)

## Create, edit, and test prompts

> To access the agent builder, use either of these options:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To access Agent Builder, use either of these options:
```

- In the AI Toolkit view, select **Agent (Prompt) Builder**
- Select **Try in Agent (Prompt) Builder** from a model card in the model catalog

> To test a prompt in the agent builder, follow these steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To test a prompt in Agent Builder, follow these steps:
```

1. In **Models**, select a model from the dropdown list, or select **Browse models** to add another model from the model catalog.

    ![select a model](./images/promptbuilder/select_models.png)

1. Enter a **User prompt** and optionally enter a **System prompt**.

   The *user prompt* is the input that you want to send to the model. The optional *system prompt* is used to provide instructions with relevant context to guide the model response.

   > [!TIP]

>    > If you don't know how to input these prompts, you can describe your project idea in natural language and let the AI-powered feature generate prompts for you to experiment with.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   > You can describe your project idea by using natural language and let the AI-powered feature generate the prompts for you to experiment with.
```

You can use the agent builder to connect to existing MCP servers or build a new MCP server from scaffold.

To use an existing MCP server, follow these steps:
1. In the **Tools** section, select **+ MCP Server**.
2. Select an option from the dropdown list to specify how you want to connect to the MCP server:
   - **Command (stdio)**: Run a local command that implements the MCP protocol
   - **HTTP (server-sent events)**: Connect to a remote server that implements the MCP protocol
3. Select tools from the MCP server if there are multiple tools available.
4. Enter your prompts and select **Run** to test the connection.

![connect to MCP server](./images/promptbuilder/mcp_existing.gif)

AI Toolkit also provides a scaffold to help you build a new MCP server. The scaffold includes a basic implementation of the MCP protocol, which you can customize to suit your needs.

To build a new MCP server, follow these steps:
1. In the **Tools** section, select **+ MCP Server**
2. Select **MCP server project**
3. Select a programming language from the dropdown list: **Python** or **TypeScript**
4. Select a folder to create the new MCP server project in.

> 5. Input a name for the MCP server project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Enter a name for the MCP server project.
```

![scaffold mcp](./images/promptbuilder/scaffold_mcp.gif)

After you create the MCP server project, you can customize the implementation to suit your needs. The scaffold includes a basic implementation of the MCP protocol, which you can modify to add your own functionality.

You can also use the agent builder to test the MCP server. The agent builder will send the prompts to the MCP server and display the response.

Follow these steps to test the MCP server:

> > Notes

Reviewer: ```suggestion

> [!NOTE]
```

> To run the MCP Server in your local dev machine, you will need: [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/) or Python installed on your machine.

1. Open VS Code Debug panel. Select `Debug in Agent Builder` or press `F5` to start debugging the MCP server.
2. Use AI Toolkit Agent Builder to test the server with the following prompt:
   1. System Prompt: You are a weather forecast professional that can tell weather information based on given location.
   2. User Prompt: What is the weather in Shanghai?

> 3. Server will be auto-connected to the Agent Builder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. The server will be automatically connected to Agent Builder.
```

> 4. Click `Run` to test the server with the prompt.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Select `Run` to test the server with the prompt.
```

![debug mcp](./images/promptbuilder/mcp_debug.gif)

## Structured output

Structured output support helps you design prompts to deliver outputs in a structured, predictable format.

![Use structured output](./images/promptbuilder/structured_output_2.gif)

> To test using structured output in the agent builder, follow these steps:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To test using structured output in Agent Builder, follow these steps:
```

1. Repeat the previous steps to iterate over your prompts by observing the model response and making changes to the prompts.

## Use MCP servers
MCP server is a tool that allows you to connect to external APIs and services, enabling your agent to perform actions beyond just generating text. For example, you can use an MCP server to access databases, call web services, or interact with other applications.

You can use the agent builder to discover and configure featured MCP servers, connect to existing MCP servers or build a new MCP server from scaffold.

### Configure MCP server from featured selections
AI Toolkit provides a list of featured MCP servers that you can use to connect to external APIs and services.

To configure an MCP server from featured selections, follow these steps:
1. In the **Tools** section, select **+ MCP Server** and select **+ Add server** in the quick pick.
2. Select **Use Featured MCP Servers** from the dropdown list.
3. Select a MCP server that fit your needs.
![connect to MCP server](./images/promptbuilder/Featured_server.png)

> For servers that are ready to use, AI Toolkit will prompt you to select tools and add to your agent afterwards.

Reviewer 2: Featured server may need `npx` or `uv` dependency, AITK will validate if `npx` or `uv` is installed, if not, AITK will prompt user that `npx` or `uv` is not installed. Can we add this information here? And also provide the installation link for them:
`node`: https://nodejs.org/en/download
`npx`: `npm install -g npx`
`uv`: https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/installation/

When this information is added here, I can add a `Learn more` link in the `npx` or `uv` not installed prompt.

Author: Updated

1. Select **Run** to send the prompts to the selected model.

1. Optionally, select **Add Prompt** to add more user and assistant prompts to the conversation, or select **Add to Prompts** as the history and context you send to the model to further guide the model's behavior.

1. Repeat the previous steps to iterate over your prompts by observing the model response and making changes to the prompts.

## Use MCP servers
MCP server is a tool that allows you to connect to external APIs and services, enabling your agent to perform actions beyond just generating text. For example, you can use an MCP server to access databases, call web services, or interact with other applications.

You can use the agent builder to discover and configure featured MCP servers, connect to existing MCP servers or build a new MCP server from scaffold.

> ### Configure MCP server from featured selections

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Configure a featured MCP server
```

AI Toolkit provides a list of featured MCP servers that you can use to connect to external APIs and services.

To configure an MCP server from featured selections, follow these steps:

> 1. In the **Tools** section, select **+ MCP Server** and select **+ Add server** in the quick pick.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the **Tools** section, select **+ MCP Server**, and then select **+ Add server** in the Quick Pick.
```

2. Select **Use Featured MCP Servers** from the dropdown list.

> 3. Select a MCP server that fit your needs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Choose an MCP server that meets your needs.
```

![connect to MCP server](./images/promptbuilder/Featured_server.png)

For servers that are ready to use, AI Toolkit will prompt you to select tools and add to your agent afterwards.

For servers that are marked with **(Configuration Required)**:

> 1. You will be prompted to enter the required configurations in `mcp.json` file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. You will be prompted to enter the required configurations in the `mcp.json` file.
```

   ![config_server](./images/promptbuilder/config_server.png)
2. Follow the guidelines to configure the server:
   1. [Filesystem](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/servers/tree/main/src/filesystem#npx)
   2. [GitHub](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/servers/tree/main/src/github#npx)
   3. [Google Maps](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/servers/tree/main/src/google-maps#npx)
   4. [Sqlite](https://github.com/modelcontextprotocol/servers/tree/main/src/sqlite#uv-1)

> 3. Once completed the configuration, go back to the Agent Builder and select **+ MCP Server** to locate the server you added from the list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. After finishing the configuration, go back to Agent Builder and select **+ MCP Server** to locate the server you added from the list.
```
